README.md, before:

# PQs Spreadsheet Monitor

Automated monitoring system for the PQs Google Spreadsheet that sends Slack notifications to team members who need to update their ETAs.

## Overview

This script monitors a Google Spreadsheet and:
1. Checks Column E (ETA) starting from row 3
2. If Column E is empty, checks Column C for team member initials
3. Sends a Slack notification to #ctc-bot-update every 3 hours tagging the person
4. Tracks notification state to avoid spam

## ⭐ Recommended Setup: GitHub Actions (No Local Machine Required)

The easiest way to run this monitor is using GitHub Actions, which runs automatically on a schedule without requiring your computer to be on.

### Prerequisites

- Google Sheets API credentials (service account JSON file)
- Slack Incoming Webhook URL
- Access to the PQs spreadsheet

### Setup Instructions

#### 1. Configure Google Sheets API

1. Go to [Google Cloud Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/)
2. Create a new project or select an existing one
3. Enable the Google Sheets API
4. Create a service account:
   - Go to "IAM & Admin" > "Service Accounts"
   - Click "Create Service Account"
   - Give it a name (e.g., "PQ Monitor")
   - Grant it "Viewer" role (minimal permissions needed)
   - Click "Done"
5. Create and download credentials:
   - Click on the service account you just created
   - Go to "Keys" tab
   - Click "Add Key" > "Create new key"
   - Choose JSON format
   - Download the file (save it somewhere safe temporarily)
6. **Share the spreadsheet** with the service account email:
   - Open the service account JSON file
   - Find the `client_email` field (looks like `xxxxx@xxxxx.iam.gserviceaccount.com`)
   - Go to your Google Spreadsheet
   - Click "Share" and add this email with "Viewer" permissions

#### 2. Configure Slack Webhook

1. Go to [Slack API](https://api.slack.com/apps)
2. Create a new app or select an existing app
3. In the left sidebar, click "Incoming Webhooks"
4. Toggle "Activate Incoming Webhooks" to **On**
5. Click "Add New Webhook to Workspace"
6. Select the **#ctc-bot-update** channel (or your desired channel)
7. Click "Allow"
8. Copy the Webhook URL (looks like `https://hooks.slack.com/services/T00000000/B00000000/XXXXXXXXXXXX`)
9. Save this URL - you'll need it for GitHub Secrets

#### 3. Encode Google Credentials

Run the helper script to encode your credentials for GitHub Secrets:

```bash
python encode_credentials.py path/to/your/credentials.json
```

This will output a base64-encoded string. Copy this string - you'll need it in the next step.

**You can delete the credentials.json file after encoding** - you won't need it anymore!

#### 4. Add GitHub Secrets

1. Go to your GitHub repository
2. Click **Settings** > **Secrets and variables** > **Actions**
3. Click **New repository secret** and add each of these:

| Secret Name | Value | Where to get it |
|-------------|-------|-----------------|
| `SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL` | `https://hooks.slack.com/services/...` | From Slack webhook (step 2) |
| `SPREADSHEET_ID` | `1dDYU1rGKYiiXxcJlYnh4lmM5UBJBPqtYIstZsiJG-ng` | From spreadsheet URL |
| `SHEET_NAME` | `Sheet1` | Name of the tab in your spreadsheet |
| `GOOGLE_CREDENTIALS_JSON` | `eyJhbGc...` (base64 string) | From step 3 |
| `NOTIFICATION_INTERVAL` | `10800` | Seconds (10800 = 3 hours) |

#### 5. Enable GitHub Actions

1. Go to your repository's **Actions** tab
2. If Actions are disabled, click the button to enable them
3. You should see the "PQs Monitor" workflow

#### 6. Test the Workflow

1. Go to **Actions** tab
2. Click on "PQs Monitor" workflow
3. Click **Run workflow** > **Run workflow**
4. Watch the logs to ensure it runs successfully

### How It Works (GitHub Actions)

- **Schedule**: Runs automatically every hour
- **Notifications**: Only sends messages every 3 hours per person (respects `NOTIFICATION_INTERVAL`)
- **State Persistence**: Uses GitHub Actions cache to remember who was notified and when
- **No Cost**: GitHub Actions is free for public repos, and 2000 minutes/month for private repos

### Modifying the Schedule

Edit `.github/workflows/pq-monitor.yml` and change the cron expression:

```yaml
schedule:
  - cron: '0 * * * *'  # Every hour at minute 0
```

Common schedules:
- Every hour: `'0 * * * *'`
- Every 30 minutes: `'*/30 * * * *'`
- Every 3 hours: `'0 */3 * * *'`
- Every day at 9 AM: `'0 9 * * *'`

Use [crontab.guru](https://crontab.guru/) to create custom schedules.

---

## Alternative: Local Setup (Requires Computer Always On)

If you prefer to run this on your local machine or a server:

### 1. Install Dependencies

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### 2. Configure Environment Variables

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Edit `.env`:
```
SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL=https://hooks.slack.com/services/YOUR/WEBHOOK/URL
SPREADSHEET_ID=1dDYU1rGKYiiXxcJlYnh4lmM5UBJBPqtYIstZsiJG-ng
SHEET_NAME=Sheet1
GOOGLE_CREDENTIALS_PATH=credentials.json
NOTIFICATION_INTERVAL=10800
CHECK_INTERVAL=300
```

### 3. Run the Monitor

```bash
# Continuous mode (runs forever)
python pq_monitor.py

# Run in background
nohup python pq_monitor.py > output.log 2>&1 &
```

---

## Configuration

### User Mapping

The mapping of initials to Slack User IDs is in `config.py`:

```python
USER_MAPPING = {
    'CF': 'U096E94CPSQ',
    'DI': 'U02S7HKMLEQ',
    'JS': 'U01UYJGCDT9',
    'RD': 'U07B2J0JQ04',
    'CTC': 'U09E4C6S5GS',
    'CC': 'U01Q1DPP4UX',
    'JC': 'U0248V5LYV6',
    'SR': 'U02QMUE0ELV',
}
```

### Configuration Options

| Variable | Description | Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| `NOTIFICATION_INTERVAL` | Seconds between notifications to same user | 10800 (3 hours) |
| `CHECK_INTERVAL` | Seconds between spreadsheet checks (local only) | 300 (5 minutes) |
| `SHEET_NAME` | Name of the sheet tab | Sheet1 |
| `START_ROW` | First row to check (in config.py) | 3 |

## How It Works

### Spreadsheet Monitoring
The script reads rows starting from row 3, checking columns C (initials) and E (ETA).

### Notification Logic
- If Column E is empty AND Column C has valid initials → notify user
- If Column E has a value → clear notification state (no spam if they update)
- If Column C is empty → skip row

### State Tracking
- `notification_state.json` tracks when each row was last notified
- Ensures 3-hour minimum between notifications per row
- Automatically clears when ETA is filled
- In GitHub Actions, this file is cached between runs

### Slack Message Format
```
@username please update your ETA in the PQs (Row 5)
```

## Files

- `pq_monitor.py` - Main monitoring script
- `config.py` - User mappings and column configuration
- `requirements.txt` - Python dependencies
- `encode_credentials.py` - Helper to encode Google credentials for GitHub
- `.github/workflows/pq-monitor.yml` - GitHub Actions workflow
- `.env.example` - Example environment variables (for local setup)
- `notification_state.json` - Auto-generated state tracking file

## Adding New Team Members

1. Get their Slack User ID:
   - Open Slack
   - Click on user's profile
   - Click "More" > "Copy member ID"

2. Edit `config.py` and add to `USER_MAPPING`:

```python
USER_MAPPING = {
    # Existing users...
    'NEW': 'U0XXXXXXXXXXX',  # New person's Slack User ID
}
```

3. Commit and push the change:

```bash
git add config.py
git commit -m "Add new team member to PQ monitor"
git push
```

The GitHub Action will automatically use the updated mapping on the next run.

## Troubleshooting

### GitHub Actions Issues

**"Error reading spreadsheet"**
- Ensure the spreadsheet is shared with the service account email
- Check that `SPREADSHEET_ID` secret is correct

**"Error authenticating"**
- Verify `GOOGLE_CREDENTIALS_JSON` secret is the base64-encoded credentials
- Re-run `encode_credentials.py` and update the secret if needed

**"Error sending Slack message"**
- Verify `SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL` is correct (should start with `https://hooks.slack.com/services/`)
- Ensure the webhook is configured for the correct channel
- Test the webhook URL manually using curl to verify it works

**Workflow not running on schedule**
- GitHub Actions may delay scheduled workflows by a few minutes during high load
- You can always trigger manually from the Actions tab

### Local Setup Issues

**"Credentials file not found"**
- Ensure `credentials.json` exists in the project directory
- Update `GOOGLE_CREDENTIALS_PATH` in `.env`

**"Permission denied" when reading spreadsheet**
- Share the spreadsheet with the service account email
- Service account email is in `credentials.json` under `client_email`

### Common Issues

**"Unknown initials" warning**
- Update `USER_MAPPING` in `config.py` with new team members
- Ensure initials in spreadsheet match keys in USER_MAPPING exactly (case-sensitive)

**Not receiving notifications**
- Check that Column E is actually empty
- Check that Column C has valid initials from the mapping
- Verify that 3 hours have passed since the last notification

## Viewing Logs

### GitHub Actions
1. Go to **Actions** tab
2. Click on the latest "PQs Monitor" run
3. Click on the "check-pqs" job
4. Expand "Run PQ Monitor" to see logs

### Local
Logs are printed to console when running locally.

## Security Notes

- Never commit `.env` or `credentials.json` to git (they're in `.gitignore`)
- GitHub Secrets are encrypted and only exposed during workflow runs
- Use minimal permissions for the service account (Viewer is sufficient)
- Keep your Slack webhook URL secure - anyone with it can post to your channel

## License

Internal use only

Commit message:

Use Slack API to fetch user timezone for Friday midday notifications
Changes:
- Added Slack API integration to fetch user timezone information
- Updated Friday midday window (13:00-16:00) to use each user's local timezone
- Added pytz dependency for timezone handling
- Updated documentation with Slack API token setup instructions
- Added SLACK_API_TOKEN to environment variables and GitHub Actions workflow

The midday notification window now respects each user's individual timezone,
ensuring notifications are sent at the right local time on Fridays.

README.md, after:

# PQs Spreadsheet Monitor

Automated monitoring system for the PQs Google Spreadsheet that sends Slack notifications to team members who need to update their ETAs.

## Overview

This script monitors a Google Spreadsheet and:
1. Checks Column E (ETA) starting from row 3
2. If Column E is empty, checks Column C for team member initials
3. Sends a Slack notification to #ctc-bot-update every 3 hours tagging the person
4. Tracks notification state to avoid spam

## ⭐ Recommended Setup: GitHub Actions (No Local Machine Required)

The easiest way to run this monitor is using GitHub Actions, which runs automatically on a schedule without requiring your computer to be on.

### Prerequisites

- Google Sheets API credentials (service account JSON file)
- Slack Incoming Webhook URL
- Access to the PQs spreadsheet

### Setup Instructions

#### 1. Configure Google Sheets API

1. Go to [Google Cloud Console](https://console.cloud.google.com/)
2. Create a new project or select an existing one
3. Enable the Google Sheets API
4. Create a service account:
   - Go to "IAM & Admin" > "Service Accounts"
   - Click "Create Service Account"
   - Give it a name (e.g., "PQ Monitor")
   - Grant it "Viewer" role (minimal permissions needed)
   - Click "Done"
5. Create and download credentials:
   - Click on the service account you just created
   - Go to "Keys" tab
   - Click "Add Key" > "Create new key"
   - Choose JSON format
   - Download the file (save it somewhere safe temporarily)
6. **Share the spreadsheet** with the service account email:
   - Open the service account JSON file
   - Find the `client_email` field (looks like `xxxxx@xxxxx.iam.gserviceaccount.com`)
   - Go to your Google Spreadsheet
   - Click "Share" and add this email with "Viewer" permissions

#### 2. Configure Slack Webhook and API Token

##### 2a. Set up Incoming Webhook

1. Go to [Slack API](https://api.slack.com/apps)
2. Create a new app or select an existing app
3. In the left sidebar, click "Incoming Webhooks"
4. Toggle "Activate Incoming Webhooks" to **On**
5. Click "Add New Webhook to Workspace"
6. Select the **#ctc-bot-update** channel (or your desired channel)
7. Click "Allow"
8. Copy the Webhook URL (looks like `https://hooks.slack.com/services/T00000000/B00000000/XXXXXXXXXXXX`)
9. Save this URL - you'll need it for GitHub Secrets

##### 2b. Set up OAuth Token (for timezone features)

1. In the same Slack app, go to "OAuth & Permissions" in the left sidebar
2. Scroll down to "Scopes" section
3. Under "Bot Token Scopes", click "Add an OAuth Scope"
4. Add the following scope: `users:read`
5. Scroll to the top and click "Install to Workspace" (or "Reinstall to Workspace" if already installed)
6. Click "Allow"
7. Copy the "Bot User OAuth Token" (starts with `xoxb-`)
8. Save this token - you'll need it for GitHub Secrets

#### 3. Encode Google Credentials

Run the helper script to encode your credentials for GitHub Secrets:

```bash
python encode_credentials.py path/to/your/credentials.json
```

This will output a base64-encoded string. Copy this string - you'll need it in the next step.

**You can delete the credentials.json file after encoding** - you won't need it anymore!

#### 4. Add GitHub Secrets

1. Go to your GitHub repository
2. Click **Settings** > **Secrets and variables** > **Actions**
3. Click **New repository secret** and add each of these:

| Secret Name | Value | Where to get it |
|-------------|-------|-----------------|
| `SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL` | `https://hooks.slack.com/services/...` | From Slack webhook (step 2a) |
| `SLACK_API_TOKEN` | `xoxb-...` | From Slack OAuth token (step 2b) |
| `SPREADSHEET_ID` | `1dDYU1rGKYiiXxcJlYnh4lmM5UBJBPqtYIstZsiJG-ng` | From spreadsheet URL |
| `SHEET_NAME` | `Sheet1` | Name of the tab in your spreadsheet |
| `GOOGLE_CREDENTIALS_JSON` | `eyJhbGc...` (base64 string) | From step 3 |
| `NOTIFICATION_INTERVAL` | `10800` | Seconds (10800 = 3 hours) |

#### 5. Enable GitHub Actions

1. Go to your repository's **Actions** tab
2. If Actions are disabled, click the button to enable them
3. You should see the "PQs Monitor" workflow

#### 6. Test the Workflow

1. Go to **Actions** tab
2. Click on "PQs Monitor" workflow
3. Click **Run workflow** > **Run workflow**
4. Watch the logs to ensure it runs successfully

### How It Works (GitHub Actions)

- **Schedule**: Runs automatically every hour
- **Notifications**: Only sends messages every 3 hours per person (respects `NOTIFICATION_INTERVAL`)
- **State Persistence**: Uses GitHub Actions cache to remember who was notified and when
- **No Cost**: GitHub Actions is free for public repos, and 2000 minutes/month for private repos

### Modifying the Schedule

Edit `.github/workflows/pq-monitor.yml` and change the cron expression:

```yaml
schedule:
  - cron: '0 * * * *'  # Every hour at minute 0
```

Common schedules:
- Every hour: `'0 * * * *'`
- Every 30 minutes: `'*/30 * * * *'`
- Every 3 hours: `'0 */3 * * *'`
- Every day at 9 AM: `'0 9 * * *'`

Use [crontab.guru](https://crontab.guru/) to create custom schedules.

---

## Alternative: Local Setup (Requires Computer Always On)

If you prefer to run this on your local machine or a server:

### 1. Install Dependencies

```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

### 2. Configure Environment Variables

```bash
cp .env.example .env
```

Edit `.env`:
```
SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL=https://hooks.slack.com/services/YOUR/WEBHOOK/URL
SLACK_API_TOKEN=xoxb-your-token-here
SPREADSHEET_ID=1dDYU1rGKYiiXxcJlYnh4lmM5UBJBPqtYIstZsiJG-ng
SHEET_NAME=Sheet1
GOOGLE_CREDENTIALS_PATH=credentials.json
NOTIFICATION_INTERVAL=10800
CHECK_INTERVAL=300
```

### 3. Run the Monitor

```bash
# Continuous mode (runs forever)
python pq_monitor.py

# Run in background
nohup python pq_monitor.py > output.log 2>&1 &
```

---

## Configuration

### User Mapping

The mapping of initials to Slack User IDs is in `config.py`:

```python
USER_MAPPING = {
    'CF': 'U096E94CPSQ',
    'DI': 'U02S7HKMLEQ',
    'JS': 'U01UYJGCDT9',
    'RD': 'U07B2J0JQ04',
    'CTC': 'U09E4C6S5GS',
    'CC': 'U01Q1DPP4UX',
    'JC': 'U0248V5LYV6',
    'SR': 'U02QMUE0ELV',
}
```

### Configuration Options

| Variable | Description | Default |
|----------|-------------|---------|
| `NOTIFICATION_INTERVAL` | Seconds between notifications to same user | 10800 (3 hours) |
| `CHECK_INTERVAL` | Seconds between spreadsheet checks (local only) | 300 (5 minutes) |
| `SHEET_NAME` | Name of the sheet tab | Sheet1 |
| `START_ROW` | First row to check (in config.py) | 3 |

## How It Works

### Spreadsheet Monitoring
The script reads rows starting from row 3, checking columns C (initials) and E (ETA).

### Notification Logic
- If Column E is empty AND Column C has valid initials → notify user
- If Column E has a value → clear notification state (no spam if they update)
- If Column C is empty → skip row

### Friday Midday Notification Window
- On **Fridays between 13:00-16:00** in each user's local timezone, notifications are sent regardless of the normal interval timer
- This ensures users receive a timely reminder to update their PQs before the weekend
- User timezones are automatically fetched from Slack profiles using the Slack API
- Outside this window, normal notification intervals apply (respects `NOTIFICATION_INTERVAL`)

### State Tracking
- `notification_state.json` tracks when each row was last notified
- Ensures 3-hour minimum between notifications per row
- Automatically clears when ETA is filled
- In GitHub Actions, this file is cached between runs

### Slack Message Format
```
@username please update your ETA in the PQs (Row 5)
```

## Files

- `pq_monitor.py` - Main monitoring script
- `config.py` - User mappings and column configuration
- `requirements.txt` - Python dependencies
- `encode_credentials.py` - Helper to encode Google credentials for GitHub
- `.github/workflows/pq-monitor.yml` - GitHub Actions workflow
- `.env.example` - Example environment variables (for local setup)
- `notification_state.json` - Auto-generated state tracking file

## Adding New Team Members

1. Get their Slack User ID:
   - Open Slack
   - Click on user's profile
   - Click "More" > "Copy member ID"

2. Edit `config.py` and add to `USER_MAPPING`:

```python
USER_MAPPING = {
    # Existing users...
    'NEW': 'U0XXXXXXXXXXX',  # New person's Slack User ID
}
```

3. Commit and push the change:

```bash
git add config.py
git commit -m "Add new team member to PQ monitor"
git push
```

The GitHub Action will automatically use the updated mapping on the next run.

## Troubleshooting

### GitHub Actions Issues

**"Error reading spreadsheet"**
- Ensure the spreadsheet is shared with the service account email
- Check that `SPREADSHEET_ID` secret is correct

**"Error authenticating"**
- Verify `GOOGLE_CREDENTIALS_JSON` secret is the base64-encoded credentials
- Re-run `encode_credentials.py` and update the secret if needed

**"Error sending Slack message"**
- Verify `SLACK_WEBHOOK_URL` is correct (should start with `https://hooks.slack.com/services/`)
- Ensure the webhook is configured for the correct channel
- Test the webhook URL manually using curl to verify it works

**Workflow not running on schedule**
- GitHub Actions may delay scheduled workflows by a few minutes during high load
- You can always trigger manually from the Actions tab

### Local Setup Issues

**"Credentials file not found"**
- Ensure `credentials.json` exists in the project directory
- Update `GOOGLE_CREDENTIALS_PATH` in `.env`

**"Permission denied" when reading spreadsheet**
- Share the spreadsheet with the service account email
- Service account email is in `credentials.json` under `client_email`

### Common Issues

**"Unknown initials" warning**
- Update `USER_MAPPING` in `config.py` with new team members
- Ensure initials in spreadsheet match keys in USER_MAPPING exactly (case-sensitive)

**Not receiving notifications**
- Check that Column E is actually empty
- Check that Column C has valid initials from the mapping
- Verify that 3 hours have passed since the last notification

## Viewing Logs

### GitHub Actions
1. Go to **Actions** tab
2. Click on the latest "PQs Monitor" run
3. Click on the "check-pqs" job
4. Expand "Run PQ Monitor" to see logs

### Local
Logs are printed to console when running locally.

## Security Notes

- Never commit `.env` or `credentials.json` to git (they're in `.gitignore`)
- GitHub Secrets are encrypted and only exposed during workflow runs
- Use minimal permissions for the service account (Viewer is sufficient)
- Keep your Slack webhook URL secure - anyone with it can post to your channel

## License

Internal use only
